Kubeadm/dual stack support in 1.21 (#26675)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/enable-disable-dual-stack.md

---
reviewers:
- sig-cluster-lifecycle
- neolit123
- sftim

> title: Enable Or Disable Dual-Stack via kubeadm

Reviewer: ok, give this is a feature gate it means that the feature at some point will be locked to true and cannot be disabled.
with that in mind, IMO we should name the page more broadly:

```suggestion
title: Dual-stack support with kubeadm
```

```
dual-stack-support.md
```

once the feature is GA, we can keep some of the details, but remove the feature gate related toggles.

feature:
  title: Enable Or Disable Dual-Stack via kubeadm
content_type: task
weight: 110
---

<!-- overview -->

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.21" state="beta" >}}

IPv4/IPv6 dual-stack enables the allocation of both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses to {{< glossary_tooltip text="Pods" term_id="pod" >}} and {{< glossary_tooltip text="Services" term_id="service" >}}.

<!-- body -->

## Enable dual-stack via kubeadm

Install kubeadm following the steps from the [Installing Kubeadm](/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/install-kubeadm/) documentation.

Make sure that nodes allow IPv6 forwarding, if not, run `sudo sysctl -w net.ipv6.conf.all.forwarding=1` on every node in the cluster.

{{< note >}}
`kubeadm upgrade` will change `IPv6DualStack` to true by default if feature gate is not set in old cluster. However, cluster-cidr and service-cidr modification are not supported.
{{< /note >}}

### Create a dual-stack cluster

A simple command with `podCidr` and `serviceCidr` flags to create a dual-stack cluster via `kubeadm init`, it like below:

```shell

> kubeadm init --feature-gates IPv6DualStack=true --pod-network-cidr=172.30.0.0/16,fefe:ffff:0::/48 --service-cidr=172.31.0.0/16,fefe:ffff:1::/108

Reviewer 2: the ipv6 mask /108 for services is not allowed, max 112, also people use to take the ip addresses for the documentation literally so I suggest to use better the common values we have in KIND for dual-stack

```
pod-network-cidr=10.244.0.0/16,fd00:10:244::/56
service-cidr=10.96.0.0/16,fd00:10:96::/112
```

```

> To make things more clear, here is an example kubeadm [configuration file](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubernetes/cmd/kubeadm/app/apis/kubeadm/v1beta2) `kubeadm-config.yml` for the dual-stack control plane node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make things more clear, here is an example kubeadm [configuration file](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubernetes/cmd/kubeadm/app/apis/kubeadm/v1beta2) `kubeadm-config.yaml` for the dual-stack control plane node.
```

we are merging a pr for k/k/cmd/kubeadm to use YAML everywhere.

Reviewer: please apply this to the rest of the example filenames in the doc here.

Author: Done

```yaml
apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: ClusterConfiguration
featureGates:
  IPv6DualStack: true
networking:
  podSubnet: 172.30.0.0/16,fefe:ffff:0::/48

>   serviceSubnet: 172.31.0.0/16,fefe:ffff:1::/108

Reviewer 2: ditto https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/26675/files#r584168282

Author: Done

---
apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: InitConfiguration
localAPIEndpoint:
  advertiseAddress: "10.100.0.1"
  bindPort: 6443

> ```

Reviewer 2: kubelet need to be configured with the nodeIPs of each IP family

```
nodeRegistration:
  kubeletExtraArgs:
    fail-swap-on: "false"
    node-ip: 10.100.0.2,fd00:1:2:3::2
 ```

`advertiseAddress` in InitConfiguration specifies the IP address the API Server will advertise it's listening on. It equals to `--apiserver-advertise-address` flag of `kubeadm init`.

Run kubeadm to initiate the dual-stack control plane node.

```shell

> kubeadm init --config=kubeadm-config.yml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubeadm init --config=kubeadm-config.yaml
```

Author: Done

```yaml
apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: JoinConfiguration
discovery:
  bootstrapToken:
    apiServerEndpoint: 10.100.0.1:6443
    token: 0c0z4p.dnafh6vnmouus569
    caCertHashes: ["sha256:fcb3e956a6880c05fc9d09714424b827f57a6fdc8afc44497180905946527adf"]
```

Besides, here is an example kubeadm [configuration file](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubernetes/cmd/kubeadm/app/apis/kubeadm/v1beta2) `kubeadm-config.yml` for joining another control plane node to the cluster.
```yaml
apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: JoinConfiguration
controlPlane:
  localAPIEndpoint:
    advertiseAddress: "10.100.0.2"
    bindPort: 6443
discovery:
  bootstrapToken:
    apiServerEndpoint: 10.100.0.1:6443
    token: 0c0z4p.dnafh6vnmouus569
    caCertHashes: ["sha256:fcb3e956a6880c05fc9d09714424b827f57a6fdc8afc44497180905946527adf"]
```

`advertiseAddress` in JoinConfiguration.controlPlane specifies the IP address the API Server will advertise it's listening on. It equals to `--apiserver-advertise-address` flag of `kubeadm join`.

```shell
kubeadm join --config=kubeadm-config.yml ...
```

> ### Create a single-stack cluster

Reviewer 2: Enabling the dual-stack feature doesn't mean that you need to use dual-stack addresses, i.e., you can have a single-stack cluster with the feature flag enabled ... I think current validation logic allows that but I need to double check
@neolit123 ^

Reviewer: at k/k master we merged the feature gate as beta (enabled=true) and our e2e tests are passing where only IPv4 addresses are used. https://k8s-testgrid.appspot.com/sig-cluster-lifecycle-kubeadm#kubeadm-kinder-latest

Author: Add a note

localAPIEndpoint:
  advertiseAddress: "10.100.0.1"
  bindPort: 6443
nodeRegistration:
  kubeletExtraArgs:
    fail-swap-on: "false"
    node-ip: 10.100.0.2,fd00:1:2:3::2
```

`advertiseAddress` in InitConfiguration specifies the IP address the API Server will advertise it's listening on. It equals to `--apiserver-advertise-address` flag of `kubeadm init`.

Run kubeadm to initiate the dual-stack control plane node.

```shell
kubeadm init --config=kubeadm-config.yaml
```

Currently, `kube-controller-manager` flags `--node-cidr-mask-size-ipv4|--node-cidr-mask-size-ipv6` are setting with the default value. See [enable IPv4/IPv6 dual stack](/docs/concepts/services-networking/dual-stack#enable-ipv4ipv6-dual-stack).

There is a limitation here, `--apiserver-advertise-address` flag doesn't support dual-stack.

### Join a node to dual-stack cluster

Before joining a node, make sure that the node has IPv6 routable network interface and allows IPv6 forwarding.

Here is an example kubeadm [configuration file](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubernetes/cmd/kubeadm/app/apis/kubeadm/v1beta2) `kubeadm-config.yaml` for joining a worker node to the cluster.

```yaml
apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta2

> kind: JoinConfiguration

Reviewer 2: you need to set the kubelet node-ip dual-stack addresses here too IIRC

Author: Updated.
Missing it here.

---

> reviewers:
> - sig-cluster-lifecycle
> - neolit123
> - sftim

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

we should remove this.

title: Enable Or Disable Dual-Stack via kubeadm
feature:

>   title: Enable Or Disable Dual-Stack via kubeadm

Reviewer: as mentioned here we should make the title more generic:
> Dual-stack support with kubeadm

https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/26675/files#r583667883

and file rename `dual-stack-support.md`

content_type: task
weight: 110
---

<!-- overview -->

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.21" state="beta" >}}

IPv4/IPv6 dual-stack enables the allocation of both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses to {{< glossary_tooltip text="Pods" term_id="pod" >}} and {{< glossary_tooltip text="Services" term_id="service" >}}.

<!-- body -->

## Enable dual-stack via kubeadm

Install kubeadm following the steps from the [Installing Kubeadm](/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/install-kubeadm/) documentation.

Make sure that nodes allow IPv6 forwarding, if not, run `sudo sysctl -w net.ipv6.conf.all.forwarding=1` on every node in the cluster.

{{< note >}}

> `kubeadm upgrade` will change `IPv6DualStack` to true by default if feature gate is not set in old cluster. However, cluster-cidr and service-cidr modification are not supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`kubeadm upgrade` will change `IPv6DualStack` to true by default if the feature gate is not set in an old cluster. However, cluster-cidr and service-cidr modification are not supported.
```

{{< /note >}}

### Create a dual-stack cluster

> A simple command with `podCidr` and `serviceCidr` flags to create a dual-stack cluster via `kubeadm init`, it like below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a dual-stack cluster with `kubeadm init` you can pass the following flags:
```

```shell

> kubeadm init --feature-gates IPv6DualStack=true --pod-network-cidr=10.244.0.0/16,fd00:10:244::/56 --service-cidr=10.96.0.0/16,fd00:10:96::/112

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kubeadm init --pod-network-cidr=10.244.0.0/16,fd00:10:244::/56 --service-cidr=10.96.0.0/16,fd00:10:96::/112
```

since the FG becomes beta in 1.21 we don't need to pass `--feature-gates IPv6DualStack=true`

```

> To make things more clear, here is an example kubeadm [configuration file](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubernetes/cmd/kubeadm/app/apis/kubeadm/v1beta2) `kubeadm-config.yaml` for the dual-stack control plane node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make things clearer, here is an example kubeadm [configuration file](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubernetes/cmd/kubeadm/app/apis/kubeadm/v1beta2) `kubeadm-config.yaml` for the primary dual-stack control plane node.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: ClusterConfiguration
featureGates:
  IPv6DualStack: true
networking:
  podSubnet: 10.244.0.0/16,fd00:10:244::/56
  serviceSubnet: 10.96.0.0/16,fd00:10:96::/112
---
apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: InitConfiguration
localAPIEndpoint:
  advertiseAddress: "10.100.0.1"
  bindPort: 6443
nodeRegistration:
  kubeletExtraArgs:
    fail-swap-on: "false"
    node-ip: 10.100.0.2,fd00:1:2:3::2
```

> `advertiseAddress` in InitConfiguration specifies the IP address the API Server will advertise it's listening on. It equals to `--apiserver-advertise-address` flag of `kubeadm init`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`advertiseAddress` in InitConfiguration specifies the IP address the API Server will advertise it's listening on. It equals to the `--apiserver-advertise-address` flag of `kubeadm init`.
```

Run kubeadm to initiate the dual-stack control plane node.

```shell
kubeadm init --config=kubeadm-config.yaml
```

> Currently, `kube-controller-manager` flags `--node-cidr-mask-size-ipv4|--node-cidr-mask-size-ipv6` are setting with the default value. See [enable IPv4/IPv6 dual stack](/docs/concepts/services-networking/dual-stack#enable-ipv4ipv6-dual-stack).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, the kube-controller-manager flags `--node-cidr-mask-size-ipv4|--node-cidr-mask-size-ipv6` are being left with default values. See [enable IPv4/IPv6 dual stack](/docs/concepts/services-networking/dual-stack#enable-ipv4ipv6-dual-stack).
```

^ not sure if my suggestion is correct in terms of context.

> There is a limitation here, `--apiserver-advertise-address` flag doesn't support dual-stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< note >}}
Currently the `--apiserver-advertise-address` flag does not support dual-stack.
{{< /note >}}
```

why does `apiserver-advertise-address` does not support dual stack?
what else can we add here as context in terms of the core components?

Reviewer 2: this has a lot of implications and is not a clear win to dual-stack it, neither it has a good use case backing it up

### Join a node to dual-stack cluster

Before joining a node, make sure that the node has IPv6 routable network interface and allows IPv6 forwarding.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Here is an example kubeadm [configuration file](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubernetes/cmd/kubeadm/app/apis/kubeadm/v1beta2) `kubeadm-config.yaml` for joining a worker node to the cluster.

```yaml
apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: JoinConfiguration
discovery:
  bootstrapToken:
    apiServerEndpoint: 10.100.0.1:6443
    token: 0c0z4p.dnafh6vnmouus569
    caCertHashes: ["sha256:fcb3e956a6880c05fc9d09714424b827f57a6fdc8afc44497180905946527adf"]
nodeRegistration:
  kubeletExtraArgs:
    fail-swap-on: "false"
    node-ip: 10.100.0.3,fd00:1:2:3::3
```

> Besides, here is an example kubeadm [configuration file](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubernetes/cmd/kubeadm/app/apis/kubeadm/v1beta2) `kubeadm-config.yaml` for joining another control plane node to the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, here is an example kubeadm [configuration file](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubernetes/cmd/kubeadm/app/apis/kubeadm/v1beta2) `kubeadm-config.yaml` for joining another control plane node to the cluster.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: JoinConfiguration
controlPlane:
  localAPIEndpoint:
    advertiseAddress: "10.100.0.2"
    bindPort: 6443
discovery:
  bootstrapToken:
    apiServerEndpoint: 10.100.0.1:6443
    token: 0c0z4p.dnafh6vnmouus569
    caCertHashes: ["sha256:fcb3e956a6880c05fc9d09714424b827f57a6fdc8afc44497180905946527adf"]
nodeRegistration:
  kubeletExtraArgs:
    fail-swap-on: "false"
    node-ip: 10.100.0.4,fd00:1:2:3::4

```

> `advertiseAddress` in JoinConfiguration.controlPlane specifies the IP address the API Server will advertise it's listening on. It equals to `--apiserver-advertise-address` flag of `kubeadm join`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`advertiseAddress` in JoinConfiguration.controlPlane specifies the IP address the API Server will advertise it's listening on. It equals to the `--apiserver-advertise-address` flag of `kubeadm join`.
```

```shell
kubeadm join --config=kubeadm-config.yaml ...
```

### Create a single-stack cluster

{{< note >}}
Enabling the dual-stack feature doesn't mean that you need to use dual-stack addresses, i.e., you can have a single-stack cluster with the feature flag enabled.
{{< /note >}}

In 1.21 the `IPv6DualStack` feature is Beta and the feature gate is defaulted to `true`. To disable the feature you must configure the feature gate to `false`. Note that once the feature is GA, the feature gate will be removed.

```shell
kubeadm init --feature-gates IPv6DualStack=false
```

To make things more clear, here is an example kubeadm [configuration file](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/kubernetes/cmd/kubeadm/app/apis/kubeadm/v1beta2) `kubeadm-config.yaml` for the single-stack control plane node.

```yaml
apiVersion: kubeadm.k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: ClusterConfiguration
featureGates:
  IPv6DualStack: false
networking:
  podSubnet: 10.244.0.0/16
  serviceSubnet: 10.96.0.0/16
```

## {{% heading "whatsnext" %}}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
